[TT-16831] docs: add OpenTelemetry metrics pages and restructure metrics section (#1808)
TykTechnologies/tyk-docs: api-management/traces.mdx

- **Latency Analysis:** Analyze trace data to pinpoint which service or component is causing latency issues, allowing for quick identification and remediation of performance bottlenecks.
    
- **Error Correlation:** Use traces to correlate errors across different services to understand the root cause of issues and track how errors propagate through the system.

## OpenTelemetry Tracing

Since v5.2, Tyk Gateway supports distributed tracing via [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/what-is-opentelemetry/). The gateway exports traces using the [OpenTelemetry Protocol (OTLP)](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otlp/), making it compatible with any modern tracing backend: Jaeger, Datadog, Dynatrace, Elasticsearch, New Relic, and others.

> ```mermaid

Reviewer: Can we replace this with a pretty diagram from Jen?

flowchart LR
    Client["Client"] -->|API Request| GW["Tyk Gateway (OTLP export)"]
    GW -->|"OTLP (gRPC or HTTP)"| Collector["OpenTelemetry Collector"]
    Collector --> Jaeger["Jaeger"]
    Collector --> Datadog["Datadog"]
    Collector --> Dynatrace["Dynatrace"]
    Collector --> Other["Any OTLP-compatible backend"]
```

Tyk also supports the legacy [OpenTracing](#opentracing-deprecated) approach (now deprecated). Migrate to OpenTelemetry for vendor-neutral, actively maintained tracing.

## Configuration

### Enable Tracing

Enable OpenTelemetry tracing at the Gateway level in `tyk.conf`:

<Tabs>
  <Tab title="Config File (tyk.conf)">
```json
{
  "opentelemetry": {
    "traces": {
      "enabled": true
    }
  }
}
```
  </Tab>
  <Tab title="Environment Variable">
     Set the environment variable `TYK_GW_OPENTELEMETRY_TRACES_ENABLED=true`.
  </Tab>
</Tabs>

By default, spans are exported via gRPC to `localhost:4317`. Configure the protocol and endpoint using [`opentelemetry.traces.exporter`](/tyk-oss-gateway/configuration#opentelemetry-exporter) (`http` or `grpc`) and [`opentelemetry.traces.endpoint`](/tyk-oss-gateway/configuration#opentelemetry-endpoint).

> TODO: Add a table here with all config options

Reviewer: This needs to be completed!

<Note>

> The root-level `opentelemetry.enabled`, `opentelemetry.exporter`, and `opentelemetry.endpoint` fields (and their environment variable equivalents `TYK_GW_OPENTELEMETRY_ENABLED`, `TYK_GW_OPENTELEMETRY_EXPORTER`, `TYK_GW_OPENTELEMETRY_ENDPOINT`) are deprecated. They continue to work for backward compatibility but should be replaced with the `opentelemetry.traces.*` equivalents in new deployments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The root-level `opentelemetry.enabled`, `opentelemetry.exporter`, and `opentelemetry.endpoint` fields (and their environment variable equivalents `TYK_GW_OPENTELEMETRY_ENABLED`, `TYK_GW_OPENTELEMETRY_EXPORTER`, `TYK_GW_OPENTELEMETRY_ENDPOINT`) are deprecated from Tyk 5.13.0. They continue to work for backward compatibility but should be replaced with the `opentelemetry.traces.*` equivalents in new deployments.
```

<img src="/img/distributed-tracing/opentelemetry/detailed-tracing-false.png" alt="Two spans generated per request with basic tracing enabled" width="800px" />

### Detailed Tracing

Enable detailed tracing per API to generate a span for each middleware in the request pipeline. These spans offer detailed insights, including the time taken for each middleware execution and the sequence of invocations.

Set the [`server.detailedTracing`](/api-management/gateway-config-tyk-oas#detailedtracing) flag in the Tyk OAS API definition, or toggle **OpenTelemetry Tracing** in the Tyk OAS API Designer.

<img src="/img/distributed-tracing/opentelemetry/detailed-tracing-oas.png" alt="OpenTelemetry Tracing toggle in the Tyk OAS API Designer" width="800px" />

<img src="/img/distributed-tracing/opentelemetry/detailed-tracing-true.png" alt="Multiple middleware spans generated with detailed tracing enabled" width="800px" />

For Tyk Classic APIs, use the [`detailed_tracing`](/api-management/gateway-config-tyk-classic#opentelemetry) field in the API definition.

### Span Processor Configuration

> When using `span_processor_type: batch` (the default), you can tune the batch processor to avoid span loss under high traffic. Use the `span_batch_config` block to configure the following fields:

Reviewer: Can we add a brief explanation what the "Span Processor" is? I take it that this option is in the Gateway config - but we should be explicit.

```json
{
  "opentelemetry": {
    "traces": {
      "span_processor_type": "batch",
      "span_batch_config": {
        "max_queue_size": 8192,
        "max_export_batch_size": 1024,
        "batch_timeout": 3
      }
    }
  }
}
```

> | Environment variable | Default | Description |

Reviewer: Why have we gone from the config structure (above) to environment variables in this table? It would be better to be consistent: give the config names consistently, the environment variables are listed in the reference (which is linked)

For the full list and details, refer to the official [OpenTelemetry Semantic Conventions](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/main/docs/http/http-spans.md#common-attributes).

## Advanced Configuration

### Context Propagation

> This setting allows you to specify the type of context propagator to use for trace data. It’s essential for ensuring compatibility and data integrity between different services in your architecture.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This setting allows you to specify the type of context propagator to use for trace data. This is essential for ensuring compatibility and data integrity between different services in your architecture.
```

<Tabs>
  <Tab title="Config File (tyk.conf)">

[`opentelemetry.traces.context_propagation`](/tyk-oss-gateway/configuration#opentelemetry-traces-context_propagation) controls which trace context format the gateway reads from incoming requests and writes to upstream requests.

```json
{
  "opentelemetry": {
    "traces": {
      "context_propagation": ""
    }
  }
}
```
  </Tab>
  <Tab title="Environment Variable">
     Set the environment variable [TYK_GW_OPENTELEMETRY_TRACES_CONTEXTPROPAGATION](/tyk-oss-gateway/configuration#opentelemetry-context_propagation).
  </Tab>
</Tabs>

The available options are:

> | Value | Behaviour |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Value | Behavior |
```

(much as it pains me to delete the "u" 😬 )

|-------|-----------|
| `tracecontext` (default) | [W3C Trace Context](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/) format |
| `b3` | [B3 multi-header](https://github.com/openzipkin/b3-propagation) format |
| `custom` | Reads and writes only the custom header set in `custom_trace_header`. No standard headers written to upstream |
| `composite` | Reads from the custom header (priority) or standard headers (fallback). Writes both the custom header and `traceparent` to upstream |

<Note>
`custom` and `composite` are available from Tyk Gateway v5.12.0 and require [`opentelemetry.custom_trace_header`](/tyk-oss-gateway/configuration#opentelemetry) to be set.
</Note>

> The diagram below shows which headers the gateway reads from the client and writes to the upstream for each mode:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The diagram below shows which headers the Gateway reads from the client and writes to the upstream for each mode:
```

> ```mermaid

Reviewer: Another opportunity for a nicer (branded) diagram

    }
  }
}
```
  </Tab>
  <Tab title="Custom">
**Custom mode** (`custom` + `custom_trace_header`) — reads from and writes to the custom header only. No standard headers are involved.

```json
{
  "opentelemetry": {
    "traces": {
      "enabled": true,
      "context_propagation": "custom",
      "custom_trace_header": "X-Correlation-ID"
    }
  }
}
```
  </Tab>
  <Tab title="Composite">
**Composite mode** (`composite` + `custom_trace_header`) — reads from the custom header (priority) or standard headers (fallback), and writes both the custom header and `traceparent` to upstream.

```json
{
  "opentelemetry": {
    "traces": {
      "enabled": true,
      "context_propagation": "composite",
      "custom_trace_header": "X-Correlation-ID"
    }
  }
}
```
  </Tab>
</Tabs>

In all modes, if the custom header is absent from the incoming request, the gateway falls back to standard headers or generates a new trace ID. The custom header is never generated if it wasn't present in the original request.

### Sampling

Tyk supports configuring the following sampling strategies using [`opentelemetry.sampling`](/tyk-oss-gateway/configuration#opentelemetry) in `tyk.conf`.

> ```mermaid

Reviewer: Another image?

flowchart LR
    Req["Incoming Request"] --> Type{"opentelemetry.sampling.type"}
    Type -- AlwaysOn --> Sampled["Sampled"]
    Type -- AlwaysOff --> Dropped["Not Sampled"]
    Type -- TraceIDRatioBased --> PB{"parent_based enabled?"}
    PB -- No --> Ratio{"random value\n< sampling.rate?"}
    PB -- Yes --> Parent{"Has parent span?"}
    Parent -- Yes --> Inherit["Inherit parent's sampling decision"]
    Parent -- No --> Ratio
    Ratio -- Yes --> Sampled
    Ratio -- No --> Dropped

    style Sampled fill:#22c55e,color:#fff
    style Dropped fill:#ef4444,color:#fff
```

#### Sampling Type

This setting dictates the sampling policy that OpenTelemetry uses to decide if a trace should be sampled for analysis. The decision is made at the start of a trace and applies throughout its lifetime. By default, the setting is `AlwaysOn`.

> To customize, you can either set the [TYK_GW_OPENTELEMETRY_TRACES_SAMPLING_TYPE](/tyk-oss-gateway/configuration#opentelemetry-sampling-type) environment variable or modify the `opentelemetry.traces.sampling.type` field in the Tyk Gateway configuration file. Valid values for this setting are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Set the [`opentelemetry.traces.sampling.type`](/tyk-oss-gateway/configuration#opentelemetry-traces-sampling-type) field in the Tyk Gateway configuration file or use the equivalent environment variable. Allowed values for this setting are:
```

> | Value | Behaviour |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Value | Behavior |
```

|-------|-----------|
| `AlwaysOn` (default) | All traces are sampled |
| `AlwaysOff` | No traces are sampled |

> | `TraceIDRatioBased` | Samples a fraction of traces based on `opentelemetry.traces.sampling.rate` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `TraceIDRatioBased` | Samples a fraction of traces based on the configured [sampling rate](/api-management/traces#sampling-rate) |
```

#### Sampling Rate

> This field is crucial when the `Type` is configured to `TraceIDRatioBased`. It defines the fraction of traces that OpenTelemetry will aim to sample, and accepts a value between 0.0 and 1.0. For example, a `Rate` set to 0.5 implies that approximately 50% of the traces will be sampled. The default value is 0.5. To configure this setting, you have the following options:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [`opentelemetry.traces.sampling.rate`](/tyk-oss-gateway/configuration#opentelemetry-traces-sampling-rate) field is used to control what fraction of total traces will be sampled when the `TraceIDRatioBased` sampling is configured. It accepts a value between 0.0 and 1.0. For example, a `rate` set to 0.5 implies that approximately 50% of the traces will be sampled. The default value is 0.5.
```

> - **Environment Variable**: Use [TYK_GW_OPENTELEMETRY_SAMPLING_RATE](/tyk-oss-gateway/configuration#opentelemetry-sampling-rate).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> - **Configuration File**: Update the `opentelemetry.traces.sampling.rate` field in the configuration file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

#### ParentBased Sampling

> This option is useful for ensuring the sampling consistency between parent and child spans. Specifically, if a parent span is sampled, all it's child spans will be sampled as well. This setting is particularly effective when used with `TraceIDRatioBased`, as it helps to keep the entire transaction story together. Using `ParentBased` with `AlwaysOn` or `AlwaysOff` may not be as useful, since in these cases, either all or no spans are sampled. The default value is `false`. Configuration options include:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Parent based sampling ensures sampling consistency between parent and child spans. Specifically, if a parent span is sampled, all its child spans will be sampled at the same rate.

This is particularly effective when used with `TraceIDRatioBased` sampling, as it helps to keep the entire transaction story together. Using `ParentBased` with `AlwaysOn` or `AlwaysOff` may not be as useful, since in these cases, either all or no spans are sampled.

Enable parent based sampling by setting [`opentelemetry.traces.sampling.parent_based`](/tyk-oss-gateway/configuration#opentelemetry-traces-sampling-parentbased) or the equivalent environment variable. The default value is `false`.
```

> - **Environment Variable**: Use [TYK_GW_OPENTELEMETRY_TRACES_SAMPLING_PARENTBASED](/tyk-oss-gateway/configuration#opentelemetry-traces-sampling-parentbased).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> - **Configuration File**: Update the `opentelemetry.traces.sampling.parent_based` field in the configuration file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
